## Accounts
Tezos uses two types of accounts:

Classic accounts (also known as implicit accounts) with an address, storing tez (ꜩ). These accounts have addresses that start with "tz1", "tz2", "tz3" or "tz4." Any wallet application or the Octez command-line tool can create implicit accounts.

Smart contract accounts (also known as originated accounts) with an address, storing code and tez (ꜩ). Originated accounts have addresses that start with "KT1." Creating an originated account is part of the process of deploying a smart contract; see Smart contracts.

## Asset types
In a blockchain ecosystem, a digital asset that can be transferred between accounts is called a token. Tezos supports many types of tokens, including:

- The native token tez (also known as XTZ or represented by the symbol ꜩ), which is the primary token on Tezos and the token that transaction fees are paid in
- Fungible tokens, which are interchangeable and accounts can own any amount of, like tez
- Non-fungible tokens (NFTs), which are unique digital assets that can represent ownership of something
- Stablecoins, which are tied to the price of fiat currencies such as USD and EUR
- Wrapped tokens, which represent tokens from another blockchain or another standard; see Wrapped tokens
- Non-transferable tokens, also known as soulbound tokens, which cannot be transferred to another account after they are created

## Consensus Mechanism
Tezos has introduced Liquid Proof of Stake (LPoS) as an evolution from Delegated Proof of Stake (DPoS). In LPoS, validators, called "bakers," can be any user with enough coins(6000ꜩ) or those who choose to delegate,with rewards proportional to the invested amount. The emphasis is on governance liquidity rather than network scalability.
Baking occurs in cycles, and tokens are frozen during this process. 
A cycle consists of 4096 blocks (about 2.8 days), with seven cycles to accumulate rewards, five more for delegation services to receive and
transfer rewards, and tokens remaining frozen for several weeks.
The slot selection involves creating a random seed each cycle, generating a priority list based on stake snapshots from two cycles ago. Snapshots occur every 256 blocks for active delegates meeting a 6000ꜩ threshold. The seed is created through a "Commit & Reveal" process.
Baker selection is based on stake probabilities, with a round-robin process cycling through a priority list. Security measures include penalizing bakers attempting double baking by slashing their security deposit, half burned and half rewarded to the accuser.

## Fee
Each transaction on Tezos has a cost for the user. 
To account for this, the user must include a gas fee when submitting transactions.
Bakers will then choose transactions using a minimal fee filter. If the baker chooses a transaction, he will add it to the block and propagate it. 
The standard unit is the **mutez**, 1 tez = 1.000.000 mutez.
The minimal unit is the **nano-tez**, 1 mutez = 1000 nano-tez 

Let: 
* Minimal Fees: minF
* Storage Fee (in bytes "B"): s
  (The size "ss" is the number of bytes in the complete serialized operation).
* Gas used for the operation (in gas unit "gu"): g
* Minimal nano-tez per byte: min(nꜩ/B)
* Minimal nano-tez per gas unit: min(nꜩ/gu)
* Gas unit cost in Tez is defined by the protocol. It does not depend on the fee market; it does not depend on arbitrary defaults in config files; etc 
  
Then:
$$Fees≥minF​+min(nꜩ/B)×s+min(nꜩ/gu​)×g$$

The transaction default values are:
* minF=100 µꜩ
* min(nꜩ/B)=250,000 nꜩ/B (250 µꜩ/B)
* min(nꜩ/gu)=100 nꜩ/gu​ 

## Block's creation

### Actors
Two types of actors are involved in the block creation process:

- The Delegate, that can be :
1. a Baker, who participates in the consensus by creating new blocks and by attesting the blocks created by other bakers.
2. an Accuser, who participates in the consensus by monitoring validators works.
- The Delegator, that can delegate their tokens to a Delegate.

Several bakers are elected to create a block with a priority list. The one with the highest priority will try to create a block. If they fail to do so within the time limit, the hand will pass to the next baker. A block generated by the baker that does not have priority will be invalid and refused by the network.
A baker can be marked as either active or passive. A passive delegate cannot be selected for baking or attesting. A baker becomes passive in cycle *n* if they fail to create any block or attestation in the past *PRESERVED_CYCLES* cycles, that is to say, in cycles *n-1*, *n-2*, *…*, *n - PRESERVED_CYCLES*.

There are also **accusers**. This type of delegates monitor that a baker does not create two competing blocks at the same level nor attest multiple blocks.

### Cycle
The Tezos consensus is organized in cycles. One cycle corresponds to *BLOCKS_PER_CYCLE* = 16,384 blocks (≈ 2.8 days).
At any point, the shell will not implicitly accept a branch (chain of blocks) which fork point is in a cycle more than PRESERVED_CYCLES = 5 cycles in the past (≈ 14 days).
The random seed for cycle *n* is a 256-bit number generated at the very end of cycle *n-1* from the previous seed and the nonces that delegates commit during cycle n-2.
One out of every *BLOCKS_PER_COMMITMENT* (= 32 blocks) can contain a commitment. There are therefore, at most BLOCKS_PER_CYCLE / *BLOCKS_PER_COMMITMENT* (= 128 commitments) per cycle. The commitment is generated by the baker who produces the block and is included in the block header.